---
title: Interpolate Claims (Un)charitably
published: true
---

The [principle of charity](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Principle_of_charity) requires interpreting the speaker's claims in the strongest possible light. However, it is not always clear what the strongest version of a claim is. If I say "money can't buy happiness," the most true version of the claim is "the is no way to convert money directly into happiness; any conversion must happen through purchasing goods or services." This trivially true statement isn't likely to be what I meant. In a more degenerate case, two listeners with different beliefs might hear the same claim, try their hardest to apply the principle of charity, and come away with different interpretations. For example, one person who hears "money can't buy happiness" might take it to mean "money has sharply diminishing marginal returns on happiness". In contrast, the other might take it to mean "people above a certain income threshold do not become happier when given additional money." Both people might agree with their charitable interpretation of what I said, but one of them disagrees with what I meant. The principle of charity is useful but incomplete.

A better way to interpret a claim is to take all possible ways it could be interpreted and indicate how much you agree with each interpretation. For instance, someone might claim "apples are heavy," and I would ideally provide my subjective probability distribution over apples' weight. This is intractable.

A tractable approximation is picking two extreme interpretations and interpolating between them. I usually call these the weak and strong versions of the claim. For example, I might say, "humanity is bad at coordination". When I get called for not being specific enough, I might say, "The weak version of the claim is that there exists at least one societal Pareto improvement that hasn't been implemented. The strong version might be that such Pareto improvements are plentiful and easy to spot. I think the weak version is obviously true, and the strong version is mostly true." Interpreting other people's claims this way lets you find the strongest version of the claim you agree with.

In practice, it is sometimes difficult to find the relevant dimension of variation when interpreting a claim. Not finding this dimension can be a sign that you don't know what point a particular claim serves. For example, if the claim "oranges are bad" requires an answer to "bad at what?" before one can identify the strong and weak versions of the claim. However, interpolating between at least two possible interpretations of a claim lets me better identify my own beliefs and more precisely pinpoint disagreements.

